# Masters-Thesis-LLM
Welcome to my final masters thesis project ! For this project I created large language model built with a supervised learning technique to sort text based on the most prevelant emotion present out of the four most basic emotions higlighted in the Basic Emotion Theory (anger, fear, sadness, joy). 

**Overview **

Within my BDA798 special studies class I continued the research and project that I was doing in the previous BDA special studies class that I took in the summer of 2025. Within the summer course I created an emotion tagger that read in tweets and using a cosine similarity test compared each word in the tweet with one of the four basic emotions - anger, sadness, joy, and fear. It then, using an algorithm I created, tagged each text with the strongest emotion of the four. 

This semester, within BDA798, I had the goal of tagging each tweet with the strongest emotion but this time I created a machine learning model to tag the tweets with said emotion. In order to do so, which I will go into more detail about further on within this paper, I used the BERT encoding algorithm to encode my text which was associated with one of the four above emotions. I then passed this trained data, with the tagged emotions having come from crowd sourced annotations, through two different machine learning models. I used both a decision tree model and a random forests model training both of them and tuning the hyperparameters. I then used the completed model to compare the sentiment of tweets from the 2020 US presidential election and the 2024 US presidential election. 

**Learning Experiences **

Within this project I learned a lot about the different stages of building a machine learning model, BERT encoding, using pre-trained machine learning models, and API keys. My biggest learning has been about the machine learning pipeline, start to finish, and exactly what steps are necessary in building a successful machine learning model. I also learned about the key differences between decision tree models and random forest models and why random forest models are more reliable than decision trees when applied to external data. I learned how to use my model for data analysis purposes, including the fact that the data I’d like to use needs to be passed through the exact same data preparation pipeline as the data I used to train my model. This highlights one of the reasons it’s essential to save data training and preparation methods in a clear format so that they can be used later on. 

	Another area I had a large amount of learning in was how to integrate pre-trained embedding models into my pipeline and how to use those embeddings within the training of my model. For my pretrained embedding model I decided to use the BERT model which has been trained using two different training steps, pre-training and fine-tuning. The model is trained on unlabeled data over multiple tasks and then passes on to the fine-tuning stage where the model is initialized with pre-trained parameters and is then fine-tuned in a supervised manner with downstream tasks. BERT’s architecture consists of a bidirectional transformer encoder that first tokenizes the text splitting it into subword tokens and adding special tokens at both the beginning and end of the encoding to signify that it is a BERT encoding. The subword tokens are then looked up based on the actual number of the token, the position of the token, and the segment type of the token - these are then added together to get the input vector. 
The input vector is then passed through 12 identical encoding layers which compute attention scores between each token and it’s surrounding tokens which ensures that the positioning of each word and the context of it is taken into account when encoding the text. The output is than passed back through the same process and normalized after each round which eventually created the output in the form of a matrix which can than be used.Using a pretrained model to embed my text was essential for multiple reasons. First, within the data I used to train my model I did not have enough data to provide a diverse enough amount of text to train a text encoding model. Using a pretrained model allowed me to use a model that had been trained on vast amounts of data and therefore provided more accurate word associations and word embeddings. Second, my random forests and decision tree models could only be trained with numerical inputs rather than strings. 

As a result it was essential that I embedded my training data in numerical form in order to successfully pass it through the machine learning model. Additionally, I assigned a numerical value to each emotion in order to have both the text and its associated emotion in numerical form within a two dimensional array. The output of the embedding, after I combined it with the associated numerical form of the correct emotion appeared as a two dimensional array with the first part being a matrix with a fixed length of 64 inputs, normalized by adding additional 0’s to the end of the matrix to ensure the same length of all matrixes. The second part being a number 1-4 which was correlated with one of the four basic emotions. Out of all the above I used the BERT model to embed the text but the rest of the data preparation was done by myself.  
**
Major Tasks and Assignments **

	My major tasks and assignments, as previously touched on above, included creating and training a machine learning model from start to finish. I chose to create both a random forests model and a decision tree model. My pipeline for both models was similar, differing within the tuning of the hyperparameters. For both models I prepared my data by importing the embedding model, embedding the tweets and encoding the four basic emotions they were tagged with to be numerical. I tested this data for normalcy including each emotion was equally represented within the training data. I then split this data into training data and testing data and fed this data through both models to train them with no hyperparameters included. After that I tuned the hyperparameters of both of my models. For the decision tree model I used a grid search with a variety of different inputs to find my hyperparameters which created a model with 99% accurate testing data and minimal overfitting on the first try. 	
  
For my random forests model I had a harder time tuning my hyperparameters. I was unable to do a complex grid search with a large amount of inputs because of a lack of computing power. As a result I had to start with a more basic and general grid search offering each input variable options that were spaced distantly from each other. From there I was able to take the results of the first run and hone in on the best hyperparameter values by testing hyper parameters closer and closer to the best options with each run. I eventually got hyperparameters which had an accuracy score of 98.9% and had minimal overfitting. I also included visualizations along the way including a visualization of my decision tree in order to offer a representation of how the decision tree is tagging my text. 

In the end I used my random forests model for my data analytics because random forests models are more reliable than a decision tree model. This is because a decision tree model relies on the algorithm and branches built within training of just one tree while a random forest model builds a large number of decision trees, a forest of them, and takes the average of these results. By relying and training on a multitude of decision trees and aggregating their predictions, random forest models become more reliable, decrease the risk of overfitting, and can be applied to a more versatile amount of data while still maintaining its accuracy. 

For my data analytics I compared tweets about the 2020 US presidential election to tweets about the 2024 US presidential election. I looked at the change in emotions between the two elections and tested for statistical significance at the change in emotion. I created multiple visualizations to compare the two election sentiments and highlight the overall changes. My main finding is that fear was the strongest emotion during the time of both elections though the amount of fear decreased between the 2020 and 2024 election by 34.8% and instead the levels of anger and joy rose, both by around 8%. 
**
Research Challenges + Solutions
**
	I had a few key challenges within my research. The first one was choosing which embedding model to use. As I highlighted above, I eventually chose BERT as it is well known as a reliable model that has been trained on extensive amounts of data. One of my main challenges was the lack of computing power which I had, but which I needed to do extensive hyperparameter searching. As I mentioned above I was able to work my way around that by doing many smaller grid searches rather than one large extensive one. I was able to get a highly accurate model in the end but spent significantly more time hyperparameter searching than I would have if I had had larger computing power. 
  
	I had complications reading in certain types of files and had to alter file types to make them readable by google colab, where I did all of my coding. Additionally, I originally had difficulty choosing what models to use, what methodology to use, what type of pipelines would be best and more. I was able to speak to multiple data engineers and data analysts at my job to get various inputs and than compare all of them with my personal knowledge. Being able to do so assisted greatly in my ability to choose the best model for the task. 
